figure legend:
Cells may be induced to senesce by different stimuli, including telomere erosion, oncogene activation (oncogene-induced senescence [OIS]), DNA damage, oxidative stress, irradiation, chemotherapy, induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) reprogramming, developmental cues, and tissue damage. These stresses trigger the upregulation of key cell cycle inhibitors, namely p16INK4a, p21CIP1, p53, p15INK4b, p14ARF, and p27KIP1, leading to a permanent cell cycle arrest (either in G1 or G2 phase). BCL-2 and PI3K/AKT anti-apoptotic pathways also become upregulated, bestowing senescent cells (SCs) with resistance to apoptotic cues. Other phenotypic alterations include an enlarged cell size (up to 2.5 times the normal counterpart) and metabolic changes such as mitochondrial and lysosomal expansion, which increase the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) as well as the activity of lysosomal senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-β-gal, detected at pH 6.0). ROS accumulation induces protein aggregates which crosslink with sugars and lipids and form insoluble lipofuscin aggresomes. Autophagy rate is increased during the early senescence programme but is highly compromised in later stages. SCs are characterized by a complex senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) that comprises a plethora of different growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, proteases, and matrix components. Primary transcriptional activators of the SASP include nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein β (c/EBPβ), and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). SASP factors, such as IL-6, IL-8, Gro-α, IGFBP-7, and PAI-1, reinforce the senescence programme in an autocrine manner, while others, like ROS, IFN-γ, TGF-β, IL-1α, VEGF, CCL2, and CCL20, induce paracrine senescence in neighbouring cells. Upon the initiation of the senescence programme, the chromatin suffers deep modifications towards the repression of proliferation-related genes and the stimulation of SASP-related genes. This results in the appearance of DNA segments with chromatin alterations reinforcing senescence (DNA-SCARS) as well as senescence-associated heterochromatic foci (SAHF). Chromatin alterations are accompanied by a downregulation of lamin B1, a major component of the nuclear lamina, compromising its integrity and leading to the extravasation of chromatin fragments into the cytosol. Cytosolic chromatin fragments (CCFs) are recognized by cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) which, in turn, triggers the activation of stimulator of interferon genes (STING). The cGAS-STING pathway stimulates pro-inflammatory SASP responses through upregulation of NF-κB. Recent studies suggest that urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR), a cell-surface protein, is also broadly expressed during senescence. The biomarkers in bold represent the most common hallmark features of cellular senescence. None of these hallmarks is exclusively specific and their manifestation can diverge according to the nature of the senescence trigger, the cell/tissue type and time of the senescence programme.